---
title: "Leetcode 1920: Clever Encoding Trick"
date: 2023-08-23
layout: post
---

Problem description: Given a zero-based permutation nums (0-indexed), build an array `ans` of the same length where `ans[i] = nums[nums[i]]` for each `0 <= i < nums.length` and return it. A zero-based permutation `nums` is an array of distinct integers from 0 to `nums.length - 1 (inclusive)`.

I did not solve this [problem](https://leetcode.com/problems/build-array-from-permutation) successfully in *O(1)* space, what I did is just to give *O(N)* space solution. Despite both solutions could solve problem in *O(N)* time, I am really amazed and learnt a lot by seeing Indecision's tree *O(1)* space [solution](https://leetcode.com/problems/build-array-from-permutation/solutions/1315926/python-o-n-time-o-1-space-w-full-explanation/). I hope you would feel the same way as I did! (This blog assumes that you already knew what [Big-O notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation) is).

O(N) space approach (my answer)
```cpp
class Solution {
public:
    vector<int> buildArray(vector<int>& nums) {
        vector<int> ans;
        for (int i=0; i<nums.size(); i++)
            ans.push_back(nums[nums[i]]);
        return ans;
    }
};
```

This space approach is using O(N) space but it creates an extra vector for writing the answers.

O(1) space approach (inDecisionTree's answer)
```c++
class Solution {
public:
    vector<int> buildArray(vector<int>& nums) {
        int q = nums.size();
        for (int i=0; i<q; i++)
            nums[i] += q * (nums[nums[i]] % q);
        for (int i=0; i<q; i++)
            nums[i] = nums[i] / q;
        return nums;
    }
};
```

To solve this problem inplace, we are facing a challenge that we have to preserve original `nums[i]` values in the algorithm, such that we are able to retrieve correct `nums[i]` values even if it was converted, since we could not guaranteed the problem does not exists a `nums[i]` where `nums[i]` itself was already converted in the conversion algorithm. This solution is able coped with this challenge perfectly:

The idea of this solution is to transform every `nums[i]` into encoded form using `a=bq+r` inspired by [Euclidean division](https://handwiki.org/wiki/Euclidean_division), or Division theorem. The solution suggested that, given an encoding formula `a = qb + r`, where `b` and `r` are not multiples of `q`, and `r < q`, we encode every `nums[i]`. There are 2 important properties from equation in `a = bq + r`.

* `r = a % q`: Why? Divided `a = bq + r` by `q`, the remainder of `bq / q` is going to be `0`, since we know `r < q`, the remainder of `r / q` is `r` itself. Using this formula, we are able to extract `r` from the encoded form `a`. 
* `b = a // q` Why? Divided (integer division) `a = bq + r` by `q`, we get `b` because `r // q` is just going to be 0 following `r < q` property.

With these properties on our mind, now we have to transform every `nums[i]` into encoded form `a`:
* Pick the length of array as `q` since we know all elements in the array is smaller than length of array from the problem description.
* Pick `nums[i]` as `r`.
* Pick `nums[nums[i]]` as `b`.

That's it! With the first for-loop transforming every `nums[i]` into encoded form, and second for-loop retrieving `b`, the problem is solved.