---
title: "Leetcode 2317: Maximizing XOR"
date: 2023-09-25
layout: post
---

Problem description: You are given a 0-indexed integer array nums. In one operation, select any non-negative integer x and an index i, then update nums[i] to be equal to nums[i] AND (nums[i] XOR x). Note that AND is the bitwise AND operation and XOR is the bitwise XOR operation. Return the maximum possible bitwise XOR of all elements of nums after applying the operation any number of times.

To complete this question, let's recall these 2 facts:
1. `XOR` is maximised when two binary numbers have largest number of pairs of `1` and `0`.

    For example, `1110` (14) XOR `1110` (14) would give you 0, whilst `1110` and `0001` would give you 15.

2. Let's think abcout this statement deeply: `In one operation, select any non-negative integer x and an index i, then update nums[i] to be equal to nums[i] AND (nums[i] XOR x)`, notice `x` can be any arbitrary number of our choice. To maximise `XOR`, we will have to make use of this and transform `nums[i]` in a way such that our `XOR` operations are maximised.

    Let's elaborate this statement using an example input: `[4, 8, 1, 6]` and write these numbers in binary-matrix form:

```
0 1 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 1 1 0
```

Things are more clear now: if we don't perform any operation (select any `x` to transform `nums[i]`), `0100 XOR 1000 XOR 0001 XOR 0110` would give us `13`. Notice that this we can optimise this using the second fact, transform `0110` into `0010` using `x=4`, and we will get `15`. Yes, the key of fact 2 is we can transform any `nums[i]` into our desired `nums[i]` to maximize `XOR` operations using a certain `x`.

One thing we have to keep in mind is that, `nums[i] AND (nums[i] XOR x)` would only give us an output that is less or equal to `nums[i]`: if there has no `1` in `nums[i]` before transform, there is no way we can augment a `1` after transformation. 

The question is much simpler now: We don't have to explicitly figure out what `x` for transforming `nums[i]` to maximise `XOR` or how many operations we need, we only need to know **can we can get as many `1`s in different positions considering given the numbers in binary form**. Therefore, all we need to do is to check, for every given number, we use `OR` opeartion to check how many `1`s are there, take a look in our example: 

*  `0000 OR 0100` gives us `0100`, it's good and we keep exploring the remaining numbers, and we are hoping to find `1`s at the `0` positions to flip `0`s in `0100`. 
*  `0100 OR 1000` gives us `1100`, great we've found another `1`
*  `1100 OR 0001` gives us `1101`, if we are able to find `1` to flip the only remaining `0`, then the `XOR` must be maximised. In other words, we are looking for `0010` to get this achieved.
*  `1101 OR 0110` gives us `1011`, which is not optimal. Therefore we apply an operation to transform `0110` into our desired state `0010`, and luckily we are able to locate the desired `1` at our desired position to flip our only remaining `0`, now the result is maximised.

Code:

```cpp
class Solution {
public:
    int maximumXOR(vector<int>& nums) {
        int res = 0;
        for (auto& n: nums) {
            res |= n;
        }
        return res;
    }
};
```
